[TT-6727] Restructured and clarified wording for Basic Auth (#3167)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: tyk-docs/content/basic-config-and-security/security/authentication-authorization/basic-auth.md

---
date: 2017-03-23T15:28:35Z
title: Basic Authentication

> tags: ["Authentication", "Security", "Basic Auth"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tags: ["Authentication", "Security", "Basic Authentication"]
```

description: "Using Basic Authentication to lock-down your APIs with Tyk"
menu:
  main:
    parent: "Authentication & Authorization"
    identifier: security-basic-authentication
weight: 5 
---

## What is Basic Authentication?

> Basic Authentication is a standard authentication mechanism supported by every standards-compliant HTTP server. It is also supported by almost every single web browser, which makes it an excellent access control method for smaller APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Basic Authentication is a standard authentication mechanism implemented by HTTP servers, clients and web browsers. This makes it an excellent access control method for smaller APIs.
```

> > In the context of an HTTP transaction, basic access authentication is a method for an HTTP user agent to provide a user name and password when making a request. HTTP Basic authentication implementation is the simplest technique for enforcing access controls to web resources because it doesn’t require cookies, session identifiers, or login pages; rather, HTTP Basic authentication uses standard fields in the HTTP header, obviating the need for handshakes. (Source: Wikipedia)

Reviewer: Is this a needed citation? "Obviating" is making me pick up a thesaurus

Author: Agreed - I was trying to make minimal content change while improving clarity, but I didn't see the point of this quote. Happy to remove it.

Reviewer 2: Will merge once comment resolved.

> > In the context of an HTTP transaction, basic access authentication is a method for an HTTP user agent to provide a user name and password when making a request. HTTP Basic authentication implementation is the simplest technique for enforcing access controls to web resources because it doesn’t require cookies, session identifiers, or login pages; rather, HTTP Basic authentication uses standard fields in the HTTP header, obviating the need for handshakes. (Source: Wikipedia)

Author: ```suggestion
```

### How does Basic Authentication work?

> Aa API request made using Basic Authentication will have an `Authorization` header that contains the API key.

Author: The section you linked is the method to register a key within the Gateway (i.e. to store valid credentials).
In the Authorization header, you need to provide valid credentials, which the Gateway then checks against its list.

> The value of `Authorization` will be in the form:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The value of the `Authorization` header will be in the form:
```

{{< img src="/img/2.10/basic_auth_settings.png" alt="Target Details: Basic Auth" >}}

### Enable Basic Authentication in your file-based API Definition 

To enable Basic Authentication, the API Definition file needs to be set up to allow basic authentication rather than expecting a standard access token; this is achieved  by setting `use_basic_auth` to true:

```{.copyWrapper}
{
  "name": "Tyk Test API",
  ...
  "use_basic_auth": true,
  ...
}
```

As you can see in the above example, enabling Basic Authentication is as simple as setting a flag for the feature in your API Definition object. Since Basic Authentication is a standard, Tyk will always look for the credentials as part of the `Authorization` header.

## Create a Basic Authentication user

When using Basic Authentication, the API key used to access the API is not generated by the Tyk system, instead you need to create at least one Basic Authentication user in the Tyk Gateway. Tyk will compare the Basic Authentication key provided in the request against the list of users you have created.

### Using Tyk Dashboard

> You can use the Tyk Dashboard to create an access keywith Basic Authentication simply select the API for which you selected Basic Authentication and, in the Authentication tab, you can see that Basic Authentication settings are automatically displayed.

Author: ```suggestion
You can use the Tyk Dashboard to register a Basic Authentication key that can then be used to access your API. 

When you select the API, you can see that Basic Authentication settings are automatically displayed in the Authentication tab:
```
